S3 DATA
Best-fit Parameters of the Learning model

The reinforcement-based state-space model has three free parameters: α, σm , and σe .
To ﬁnd the best-ﬁt parameters and their corresponding conﬁdence intervals, we per-
formed a bootstrap optimization ﬁtting procedure. Fitting was done using a two-step
process. For all optimizations, we used a Nelder-Mead optimization routine contained
in the SciPy module (optimize, minimization) in Python.


Step 1: Finding Initial Guesses with Behavioural Estimates and ‘Warm-start’ Optimization
We used a ‘warm-start’ bootstrap optimization procedure to ﬁnd an initial guess of α,
where σm and σe were held as constants (0.85 and 0.99, respectively). Estimates of σm
and σe were found using a trial-by-trial analysis (see S2 DATA).
     For each bootstrap (N = 1000), we resampled with replacement separately for
participants experiencing a steep landscape and participants experiencing a shallow
landscape. For each group, we averaged across participants to ﬁnd the mean reach an-
gle of each trial. Then we ﬁt an exponential function (Eq. 6) to these two experimental
groups. Consequently, we obtained a time-constant that deﬁnes the rate of learning
for participants experiencing the steep reinforcement landscape (λbehaviour
                                                                  steep     ) and a time-
constant for participants experiencing the shallow reinforcement landscape (λbehaviour
                                                                             shallow ).

For each exponential function, we also found the best-ﬁt term that deﬁnes the asymp-
totic reach angle (a).

     Simultaneously, with our learning model (Eq. 1) we simulated 2000 ’individuals’
experiencing the steep reinforcement landscape and another 2000 ’individuals’ expe-
riencing the shallow reinforcement landscape. Like the behavioural data, we averaged
across simulated individuals to obtain the mean reach angle for each trial. We then ﬁt an
exponential function to the simulated individuals that experienced the steep reinforce-
ment landscape and the simulated individuals that experienced a shallow reinforcement


                                            1
landscape. This yielded a time-constant that deﬁnes the rate of learning for simulated
individuals experiencing the steep reinforcement landscape (λmodel
                                                             steep ) and a time-constant

for simulated individuals experiencing the shallow reinforcement landscape (λmodel
                                                                             shallow ).

We also found the best-ﬁt term that deﬁnes the asymptotic reach angle (a) for each ex-
ponential function.

        For each bootstrap (i), we then found the best-ﬁt αi by minimizing error between
the behavioural time-constants and model time-constants according to following equa-
tion:


           αi = arg min{|(λbehaviour
                           steep        steep )| + |(λshallow − λshallow )| }
                                     − λmodel   2     behaviour  model     2
                                                                                      (C1).
                    α



This process produces a single best-ﬁt αi per bootstrap.

        Repeating this process 1000 times yields a distribution of αi . We then took the
mean of this distribution to ﬁnd a single α, which was then used as the initial guess for
the best-ﬁt optimization procedure described below.


Step 2: Finding the Best-ﬁt parameters and their 95th percentile conﬁdence intervals

The procedure for ﬁnding the best-ﬁt parameters was the same as described above,
except that all three parameters (α, σm , σe ) of the model were free to vary:


  αopti , σm
           opti
                , σeopti = arg min{|(λbehaviour
                                      steep     − λmodel
                                                   steep )| + |(λshallow − λshallow )| }
                                                           2     behaviour  model     2
                                                                                              (C2).
                        α,σm ,σe



        From each of the resulting parameter distributions, we used the mean as the best-
ﬁt value for each parameter. Further, an advantage of this bootstrap optimization pro-
cedure is that conﬁdence intervals can be found from these parameter distributions. The
best-ﬁt values (and corresponding 95th percentile conﬁdence intervals) of α, σm , and σe
were 0.40(0.25, 0.63), 0.9(0.813, 1.02), and 0.81(0.63, 0.97), respectively.



                                                  2
