S2 DATA
Trial-by-Trial Analyses
A) Behavioural estimates of motor and exploratory contributions to movement variability
There is evidence that movement variability is greater following an unsuccessful action
compared to following a successful action (Izawa and Shadmehr, 2011; Galea et al.,
2013; Pekny et al., 2015). Accordingly, an important aspect of our model was estimat-
ing movement variability following a successful reach and an unsuccessful reach.
      As a reminder, our model assumed that the movement variability (σn+1
                                                                       2
                                                                           ) after a
successful reach (r = 1) was the result of motor execution noise (σm ). We also assumed
that movement variability (σn+1
                            2
                                ) after an unsuccessful action (r = 0) is the result of the
additive effects of motor noise (σm ) and exploratory noise (σe ). Thus, as shown in Eq. 1
in the manuscript, movement variability can be modelled as
                                     
                                     
                                     
                                     σ 2
                                        m            r=1       (B1a),
                             2
                            σn+1 =
                                     
                                     
                                     σm
                                       2
                                         + σe2       r=0       (B1b).



Using the behavioural data from participants in Experiment 1 we estimated (σm ) and (σe )
using a trial-by-trial analysis.

      Following the work of Pekny and colleagues (2015), we calculated trial-by-trial an-
gular differences (∆θ) by
                                     ∆θ = θn+1 − θn    (B2).

By iterating Eq. B2 over many trials we were able to build a distribution of ∆θ. From
this distribution one can estimate the variance of ∆θ, that is σ∆θ
                                                                2
                                                                   .

      It is important to consider, however, that both θn+1 and θn are independent random
processes and their respective variances, σθ2n+1 and σθ2n , are additive in determining σ∆θ
                                                                                         2
                                                                                            .



                                                 1
This is summarized by
                                      2
                                     σ∆θ = σθ2n+1 + σθ2n   (B3).

As discussed later, the variables in this equation are estimated from a distribution by
repeatedly performing Eq. B2 across many trials. For our model, we wanted to isolate
the movement variability on a single-trial (not the additive variance that results from
subtracting two successive trials). Assuming that σθ2n+1 and σθ2n are approximately similar
in magnitude and then following some simple rearranging of Eq. B3, we approximated
single-trial movement variance (σθ2 ) with

                                                  2
                                                 σ∆θ
                                         σθ2 ≈         (B4).
                                                  2

As described in further detail below, we then used Eqs. B1-B4 to estimate motor noise
(σm ) and exploratory noise (σe ).

       We used Eqs. B1a, B2-B4 on the last 25 baseline trials to estimate motor noise
(σm ). Using baseline trials to estimate motor noise, rather than calculating changes in
reach angle after a successful action, allowed us to eliminate the confound of updated
reach aim on trial n + 1 following a rewarded on trial n. That is, we wanted to be assured
that the angular differences were caused by motor noise alone, and not confounded with
changes in reach angle due to an updating of reach aim following a successful action.
We related motor noise and single-trial baseline variance using Eqs. C1a and C4, such
that
                                          σθ2 ≈ σm
                                                 2
                                                       (B5).

Using Experiment 1 participants, our experimental estimate of σm was 0.85(0.83, 0.87)
z-score.

       To estimate the additive of effects of motor noise (σm ) and exploratory noise (σe )
following an unsuccessful trial (see Eq. 1b), we used Eqs. B2-B4 when trials n and n − 1


                                                   2
were unrewarded. This was done to minimize the differences in magnitude between
σθ2n+1 and σθ2n . Using Eqs. B1b and B4, we can then relate single-trial variability following
an unsuccessful trial to the additive effects of both motor and exploratory movement
variability with
                                   σθ2 ≈ σm
                                          2
                                            + σe2   (B6).

Using Eqs. B2-B4 we found that the estimate of σθ2 following unsuccessful trials was
1.31(1.25, 1.37) z-score. Given we had an estimate of both σθ2 and σm , we rearranged Eq.
B6 to isolate σe . As a result, we estimated σe to have a magnitude of approximately
0.99(0.93, 1.05) z-score.

     The experimental estimates of σm (0.85) and σe (0.99) were used as initial guesses
during the bootstrap optimization best-ﬁt procedure (see S3 DATA). Since these esti-
mates are based on the assumptions we list above, we let both σm and σe free to vary
in Step 2 of the bootstrap optimization best-ﬁt procedure. We found that the best-ﬁt
values (and corresponding 95th percentile conﬁdence intervals) of α, σm , and σe were
0.40(0.25, 0.63), 0.9(0.813, 1.02), and 0.81(0.63, 0.97), respectively. Moreover, there was
an overlap of the 95th percentile conﬁdence intervals between the experimental esti-
mates of variance and the corresponding best-ﬁt parameters found from the bootstrap
optimization best-ﬁtting procedure.


B) Trial-by-trial analysis based on reinforcement history

Using methods described by Pekny and colleagues (2015), we examine movement vari-
ability as a function of previous reward history. The ﬁrst analysis examines the variance
of trial-by-trial changes in reach angle given the reward of the last previous trials. The
second analysis ﬁnds the coefﬁcients of a variability state-space model. This model at-
tempts to predict movement variability given the successful (r = 1) and unsuccessful
(r = 0) reaches of the previous three trials.



                                                3
     For the ﬁrst analysis, we used Eq. B2 to calculate the trial-by-trial changes in reach
angle for each combination of successful and unsuccessful reaches during the previous
three trials. This resulted in 8 different combinations since we examined the previous
three trials. In addition to experimental trials, we also calculated trial-by-trial changes
in reach angle during baseline and washout. Similar to Pekny and colleagues (2015), we
then calculated the standard deviation of these trial-by-trial changes in reach angle.

For the second analysis, we used the following variability state-space model developed
by Pekny and colleagues (2015):


          |∆θ| = α0 (1 − r(n)) + α1 (1 − r(n − 1)) + α2 (1 − r(n − 2)) + ϵ   (B7).


Here, the absolute change in reach angle (∆θ) between trials n and n + 1 is a function
of previous unsuccessful reaches. In the equation above, the r(·) terms are set to 1
if the nth reach is successful and set to 0 if the nth reach is unsuccessful. Each αj co-
efﬁcients dictate the amount of additional movement variability on trial n + 1 given a
corresponding unsuccessful reach during one of the previous three trials. ϵ represents
the unexplained variance due to unsuccessful reaches. It has been interpreted as the
amount of movement variability due to motor noise (Pekny et al., 2015).

     We performed both of these analyses on the behavioural data of Experiment 1. We
also performed these analyses on the output of our learning model. Using our model,
we simulated 10, 000 ’individuals’ experiencing the shallow reinforcement landscape and
another 10, 000 ’individuals’ experiencing the steep reinforcement landscape.

     Since we did not did not expect differences between conditions, we initially ana-
lyzed participants’ data irrespective of the experienced reinforcement landscape. For
qualitative comparison, we then performed the same analysis after partitioning partici-
pants according to whether they experienced either the steep or shallow reinforcement
landscape. The same procedure was performed when analyzing the outputs of our learn-

                                             4
ing model. To compare to our results, we encourage the reader to examine Fig. 5 in
the paper by Pekny and colleagues (2015).

     The variance of trial-by-trial changes in reach angle as a function of previous rein-
forcement history is displayed in S2 Figure. Our behavioural results (S2,A Figure) are
quite similar to those reported by Pekny and collleagues (2015; see Fig. 5A). Speciﬁ-
cally, we also found that the variance of trial-by-trial changes in reach angle was lower
following a successful trial than an unsuccessful trial. Unexpectedly, we also observed
a qualitative difference between participants experiencing the steep and shallow rein-
forcement landscapes. However, as mentioned by Dhawale and colleagues (2017) and
expanded upon below, using the variance of trial-by-trial changes in reach angle may
not be well suited in truly capturing a reward-prediction error.

     The results of performing the trial-by-trial difference analysis on the outputs of
our learning model are displayed in S2,B Figure. In terms of shape, the patterns are
surprisingly similar to the empirical results of both our work (S2,A Figure) and Pekny
and colleagues (2015). This was unexpected given that our learning model considers
only the reinforcement state of the previous trial when modulating movement variabil-
ity. That is, given the formulation of our model we did not expect reinforcement two
or three trials back to have an impact on movement variability on a current trial. How-
ever, as suggested by Dhawale et al., 2017, there are potential confounds when trying
to relate the variance of trial-by-trial changes in reach angle to previous reinforcement
history. Some potential factors beyond reinforcement history that may inﬂuence the
variance of trial-by-trial changes in reach angle are: a) updates in reach aim, b) indepen-
dent noise between trials, or c) the propagation of dependent noise across successive
trial (van Beers et al., 2013, Chaisanguanthum et al., 2014). As highlighted by the anal-
ysis of trial-by-trial changes in reach angle on our model outputs, it is difﬁcult to solely
attribute changes in movement variability with previous reinforcement history.



                                             5
     The learning model did well to mimic the average variance of trial-by-trial changes
in reach angle given reinforcement history. However, it did not seem to capture ap-
parent differences between participants experiencing a steep reinforcement landscape
and those experiencing a shallow reinforcement landscape. It is possible that these
apparent differences are due to a reward prediction error. However, this is difﬁcult to
determine given the aforementioned limitations when examining the variance of trial-
by-trial changes in reach angle given recent reinforcement history.


     We also examined the parameters (αj and ϵ) of a variability state-space model
(Pekny et al., 2015) that were ﬁt to our Experiment 1 data (S2,C Figure) and to the
outputs of our learning model when simulating Experiment 1 (S2,D Figure). We found
that the best-ﬁt parameters of the variability state-space model were strikingly similar
between our behavioural data and the outputs of our learning model. Moreover, they
were also quite similar to the ﬁndings of Pekny and colleagues (2015; see Fig. 5B). The
interpretation of these results mirrors that of the trial-by-trial analysis above. Moreover,
the same potential confounds that may inﬂuence the ability to relate the variance of
trial-by-trial changes in reach angle to reinforcement history would also apply to this
variability state-space model.

     Despite the potential limitations of relating trial-by-trial changes in reach angle to
reinforcement history, the reported results above highlight that our model did well to
capture the average variance of trial-by-trial changes in reach angle. Moreover, these
results demonstrated that we made reasonable estimates of motor (σm ) and exploratory
(σe ) contributions to movement variability.


REFERENCES

1. Chaisanguanthum, K. S., Shen, H. H., & Sabes, P. N. (2014). Motor variability arises
from a slow random walk in neural state. Journal of Neuroscience, 34(36), 12071-12080.



                                               6
